# impact-tester
Program files for impact testing program.

**Research Abstract**
Drop weight impact testing determines the strength of a material by measuring the energy absorbed along with the sample’s fractures. Engineers use impact testing to ascertain the durability of a material and to ensure safety and reliability. This study aimed to develop a Python program that receives a video or live stream and outputs the impulse force of a collision, thereby validating the impact tester’s measurements. Digital cameras were placed at a constant distance from the impact tester with a tape measure in view, and green sticky notes were stuck to the drop mass. After, the OpenCV library was implemented to detect the mass color values within the green RGB range, and a timer recorded the start and stop points of movement. Then the velocity and acceleration were calculated using the position and time data, and with user input of mass and height through the PyQt Graphic User Interface, the impact force was found. The program accurately tracked the objects and returned plots of position, velocity, and acceleration.

Furthermore, the height and mass data precisely calculated the initial potential energy of the drop mass. From these findings, it can be concluded that Python can be used to measure the impact force of a drop weight collision, aiding engineers to find the strengths of materials more confidently. Moreover, there are limited programs that automatically calculate impact force, as most require human calculations. This program can also be used to track objects to determine other metrics, allowing for numerous applications.

**Impact Testing Research Proposal**
How can Python and OpenCV be used to develop an application that uses either a video or live video feed to calculate the impact force of a falling object in an impact test to test the strength of a material?

**Motivation**
This project’s motivation stemmed from the interest in helping to create stronger materials through consistent and accurate testing. Having processes in place to automatically test and rate the strength of a compound would greatly smooth the impact testing process and reduce errors in calculations compared to eyeballing the results. Using image processing to detect real-world objects is also extremely interesting on its own, as that shows how programming can be directly applied in laboratory experiments to help validate results.

**Literature Connection**
Many of the literature connections for this project came from the field of vision tracking. The majority of the project revolved around using OpenCV to track the falling object, which was initially based on a ball, but can be used to track an object of any shape at a certain RGB color range. The paper by Sirisathitkul et al. (2013) showed how to use background subtraction to find the moving object and use its information to find velocity which could be used for further calculations. Furthermore, Zaal et. al (2009) found that digital cameras can create accurate plots of position vs time for a falling mass, and this same data can be used to calculate impact force, which very closely resembles the planned methods to plot data and use formulas to find energy and force.

**Materials**
The following materials are required: Impact Machine (created by Daniel Munoz), appropriately colored sticky note or paint (green), digital camera, compound being strength tested, and laptop computer.

**Experimental Methodology**
The experimental methodology centers on preparing an impact machine to drop. Set the weight at a constant height, measuring from the bottom of the bar. Lay out and secure a tape measure on the side of the machine in inches. Ensure that the camera has a full view of both the machine and the tape measure, and that may require setting the camera on a stool with a mount or tripod to keep the camera steady. Set the material being tested on the platform below the impact weight. Attach a green sticky note to the weight, or ensure in some other way that the weight contains green. Start recording with the camera and then drop the weight; finally, import the video into the python program to automatically calculate the impact force of the weight.

**Python Program Methodology**
The program works by tracking the position of a green object on the video stream (or a live streamed video from a webcam) in relation to time, which it does by forming a mask around collected green pixels. Currently, an RGB range is specified to detect a green object, which can become an issue if there is green in the background. By taking the position of the object’s center at regular time intervals, calculations can be run that eventually work up to finding the impact force of the object. Using the position and time, the velocity and acceleration can be calculated, and the impact force formula can be used to find our final results. Furthermore, the position and time data can be used to create matplotlib plots for position, velocity, and acceleration to output to the user. 

**Potential Results**
Our program should be able to track the falling weight and estimate the impact force that it carries with it. The resulting effect on the compound can be analyzed manually. Furthermore, the results for acceleration and force should closely match the readings from the impact testing machine itself, which is also capable of taking those measurements and making those calculations.
A less-than-convincing result could be caused by the limiting frame rate of the video feed, which would cause the margins of error to increase as the program attempts to track the ball. Moreover, a discrepancy between the impact testing machine and this program may occur, which could signal that certain factors were not fully accounted for, such as resistance. Likewise, an acceleration recorded that differs from the acceleration due to gravity would not be convincing of a fully-functioning program.
